A common recommendation that has been given when learning languages is to avoid flashcards that simply associate words from one language to another. Instead, the ideal flashcard would associate the word you're trying to learn to an illustration of the concept it refers to, not the word itself. The idea here is to prevent your brain from getting into the habit of thinking in one language and translating to another. The mapping in your head should go concept->word, and not word->concept->word.

I like this idea, but as [others](https://ankieverything.wordpress.com/language-learning/) have pointed out, there are problems that get in the way of its implementation. Compiling such a library of images takes exhorbitant amounts of time, and the images are likely to be ambiguous. Furthermore, since Anki only stores text in its database, you won't be able to transfer the images simply by syncing devices - you'll have to download the deck from scratch. This may seem like a minor inconvenience to some people, but for me, the sync feature is one of Anki's greatest capabilities, and it's absolutely essential for me if I am going to practice regularly. 

What we need here is a way to store a large number of easily retrievable, high quality illustrations that cover a wide variety of topics, and to do so using only lightweight text-based data. Ideally, the images should be consistent in style and highly generic. 

Granted, you can always use data urls and svg graphics to represent images through text, but neither does anything to address the problem of procuring such a large collection of images. For svg, it's very easy to generate many images programmatically, but only when they describe something formulaic, and not when they're literally trying to convey every concept that can be expressed in a word.

This is where emoji comes in: it's text-based, culturally neutral, high quality, highly portable, highly standardized, highly generic, and highly consistent. It covers a broad range of topics that are commonly covered within language learning, including emotional state, parts of the body, family relationships, food, colors, clothing, nature, animal and plant life, weather, geography, transportation, sports, commerce, and hobby. It is practically already a visual language unto itself. Moreover, emoji solves the problem of us finding and selecting images within our deck, since emoji are very well documented. Many sites already provide full lists of every emoji possible. We need only copy/paste these lists, traverse through them, and annotate them. 

I started out with the original goal to avoid text altogether. I consider a few ways to address this issue without resorting to text. I originally accepted that the emoji would limit itself only to words that could be easily illustrated, so people would have to go elsewhere to completely learn the language. But I still needed to address some issues of ambiguity. As with any deck of images, there is the risk that some of the images will be interpreted to represent a concept that differs from the one that was intended. 

One thing I did was to dictate a ruleset that forbids including classes of emoji that are subject to ambiguity. For instance this could include emoji that vary widely between fonts (ðŸ”«), emoji that depict culturally ambiguous gestures (ðŸ¤˜ðŸ¤™ðŸ¤Ÿ), emoji that are difficult to interpret (ðŸŽ), or emoji that have multiple concrete interpretations (ðŸŒ«ï¸ðŸŒ âš¡ðŸ‘¹ðŸ‘º).

I felt this approach severely limited the number of concepts I could represent, and to make it useful would require introducing lots of rules that dictated what could or couldn't be used. If I was too restrictive, then others might find the deck disappointing, with underutilized potential. I considered establishing conventions to allow some classes of emoji to be used, just as long as the conventions were clear. For instance, early on I decided it would be best to avoid using emoji to describe verbs or adjectives, since they could generally always be confused with nouns, however I thought there might be exceptions I could allow by convention, for instance if full body emojis depicted only verbs (ðŸš¶ðŸ§ŽðŸƒðŸ•º) or face emojis depicted only adjectives (ðŸ™‚ðŸ™ðŸ˜¨). This only complicated the rule system and I didn't want the deck to turn into an excercise in learning conventions.

Another thing I considered was to allow certain kinds of emoji, just as long as every emoji would come with hovertext that explained the concept. This way, I could still prevent the user from subconciously mapping word->concept->word without risk of introducing ambiguity. The problem I found with this approach was that it would now introduce a new excercise in memorization: if the user wants to save time and proceed through the deck easily, they'll have to memorize the hovertext for each emoji. The purpose of the deck was to reduce the number of mappings that occur in our head. Ideally, we want to map concept->word, and not word->concept->word, and it defeats the purpose entirely if our mapping winds up being image->hovertext->concept->word. 

I was left to reevaluate whether it was ever a good idea in the first place to restrict myself to images. I'm reminded of another deck I had created that I had found highly successful, for memorizing the [periodic table](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/922797769). Part of the reason I found this deck so successful was that the deck featured prompts that included many visual and textual cues, including both the name of an element and its symbol as they would appear in the periodic table. That way, your brain could subconciously pick the cue it liked best and stick with it. If that meant focusing on a part of the element that wouldn't often appear in practical applications, that was okay, since other decks in the series would associate the different cues amongst themselves. If for instance your brain leveraged atomic symbol, other decks would teach you to associate the atomic symbol with the element name, so if the element name came up in conversation you could recall its symbol, and then associate that with the element it's next to.

I now thoroughly believe the best approach is to leverage multiple visual and textual cues so that your brain can decide for itself which cue it wants to work with. Obviously, we can still continue to emphasize the image, make it bigger than the text it represents, but if the brain finds it easier to map the textual cue despite it being more difficult, then that seems to be more of a sign that the deck has failed to meaningfully depict the concept. Since any remaining ambiguity can be resolved by text, I now extend the scope of the deck to provide a full list of the most common vocabulary.
